guix: Add full installation and usage documentation (#21711)
bitcoin/bitcoin: contrib/guix/INSTALL.md

   - Works on nearly all Linux distributions
   - Installs any release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
3. Using fanquake's **Docker image** [↗︎ external instructions]()
   - Maintained by fanquake
   - Easy (automatically performs *some* setup)
   - Works on most Linux distributions
   - Installs any release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
4. Using a **distribution-maintained package** [⤓ skip to section]()
   - Maintained by distribution's Guix package maintainer
   - Normal difficulty (manual setup required)
   - Works only on distributions with Guix packaged, at time of writing:
     - Debian Bullseye or later
     - Ubuntu Hirsute or later
     - Arch Linux (via AUR)
   - Installs a release decided on by package maintainer
   - Source or binary installation depending on distribution
5. Building **from source** [⤓ skip to section]()
   - Maintained by you
   - Hard, but rewarding
   - Can be made to work on most Linux distributions
   - Installs any commit (more granular)
   - Source installation, requires lower level of trust

## Options 1 and 2: Using the official shell installer script or binary tarball

> The instructions for both using the offical shell installer script and using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installation instructions for both the official shell installer script and the
```

> binary tarballs are both found in the GNU Guix Manual's [Binary Installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
binary tarballs can be found in the GNU Guix Manual's [Binary Installation
```

section](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Binary-Installation.html).

Note that running through the binary tarball installation steps is largely
equivalent to manually performing what the shell installer script does.

Note that at the time of writing (July 5th, 2021), the shell installer script
automatically creates an `/etc/profile.d` entry which the binary tarball
installation instructions do not ask you to create. However, you will likely
need this entry for better desktop integration. Please see [this section]() for
instructions on how to add a `/etc/profile.d/guix.sh` entry.

Regardless of which installation option you chose, the changes to
`/etc/profile.d` will not take effect until the next shell or desktop session,
so you should log out and log back in.

## Option 3: Using fanquake's Docker image

Please refer to fanquake's instructions
[here](https://github.com/fanquake/core-review/tree/master/guix).

Note that the `Dockerfile` is largely equivalent to running through the binary
tarball installation steps.

## Option 4: Using a distribution-maintained package

> ### Debian 11 ("Bullseye")/Ubuntu 21.04 ("Hirsute")

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
### Debian 11 (Bullseye)/Ubuntu 21.04 (Hirsute)
```

Guix v1.2.0 is available as a distribution package starting in [Debian

> 11](https://packages.debian.org/bullseye/guix) ("bullseye") and [Ubuntu

Reviewer: If the nickname is already mentioned in the header along with the os version, we don't need to reiterate it here
```suggestion
11](https://packages.debian.org/bullseye/guix) and [Ubuntu
```

> 21.04](https://packages.ubuntu.com/hirsute/guix) (Hirsute Hippo).

Reviewer: and here

```suggestion
21.04](https://packages.ubuntu.com/hirsute/guix).
```

Note that if you intend on using Guix without using any substitutes (more
details [here]()), v1.2.0 has a known problems when building GnuTLS from source.
Solutions and workarounds are documented [here]().

To install:
```sh
sudo apt install guix
```

For up-to-date information on Debian and Ubuntu's release history:
- [Debian release history](https://www.debian.org/releases/)
- [Ubuntu release history](https://ubuntu.com/about/release-cycle)

> ### Arch Linux

Reviewer: no opinion, but we don't provide Arch Linux specific instructions anywhere else

Author: I think we do here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/build-unix.md#setup-and-build-example-arch-linux

I strongly urge you to at least skim through the entire section once before you
start issuing commands, as it will save you a lot of unncessary pain and
anguish.

### Installing common build tools

There are a few basic build tools that are required for most things we'll build,
so let's install them now:

Text transformation/i18n:
- `autopoint` (sometimes packaged in `gettext`)
- `help2man`
- `po4a`
- `texinfo`

Build system tools:
- `g++` w/ C++11 support
- `libtool`
- `autoconf`
- `automake`
- `pkg-config` (sometimes packaged as `pkgconf`)
- `make`
- `cmake`

Miscellaneous:
- `git`
- `gnupg`
- `python3`

### Building and Installing Guix's dependencies

In order to build Guix itself from source, we need to first make sure that the
necessary dependencies are installed and discoverable. The most up-to-date list
of Guix's dependencies is kept in the ["Requirements"
section](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Requirements.html) of the Guix
Reference Manual.

Depending on your distribution, most or all of these dependencies may already be
packaged and installable without manually building and installing.

For reference, the graphic below outlines Guix v1.3.0's dependency graph:

> ![boostrap map](guix-v1.3.0-bootstrap.png)

Reviewer 2: Same commit: Is it really needed to add a 0.2 MB binary blob to the git tree? Is it expected that the blob is updated on every new guix version?

It could be an external link or at least optimized (still 0.1 MB, though)

```
![boostrap map](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6399679/125064185-a9a59880-e0b0-11eb-82c1-9b8e5dc9950d.png)

Reviewer 2: (I used https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-maintainer-tools/blob/master/optimize-pngs.py for this)

Author: I expect that this'll only have to be updated every time we do a release, and I think it'll be much less relevant once `guix` is available as a package on most stable distros.

I don't mind how it's hosted so long as people can access it. Where would be a place that makes sense?

Reviewer 2: You can use above link `![boostrap map](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6399679/125064185-a9a59880-e0b0-11eb-82c1-9b8e5dc9950d.png)` if you don't want to upload it anywhere else.

Author: Done!

We need to create a `-original` version of these init scripts that's pointed to
the binaries we just built and `make install`'ed in `${bindir}` (normally,
`/usr/local/bin`).

Example for `systemd`, run as `root`:

```sh
# Create guix-daemon-original.service by modifying guix-daemon.service
bindir="$(dirname $(command -v guix-daemon))"
sed -E -e "s|/\S*/guix/profiles/per-user/root/current-guix/bin/guix-daemon|${bindir}/guix-daemon|" /etc/systemd/system/guix-daemon.service > /etc/systemd/system/guix-daemon-original.service
chmod 664 /etc/systemd/system/guix-daemon-original.service

# Make systemd recognize the new service
systemctl daemon-reload

# Make sure that the non-working guix-daemon.service is stopped and disabled
systemctl stop guix-daemon
systemctl disable guix-daemon

# Make sure that the working guix-daemon-original.service is started and enabled
systemctl enable guix-daemon-original
systemctl start guix-daemon-original
```

#### Creating `guix-daemon` users / groups

Please see the [relevant
section](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Build-Environment-Setup.html)
in the Guix Reference Manual for more details.

## Optional setup

> At this point, you are set up to [use Guix to build bitcoin](./README.md#usage).

Reviewer 2: 4a6d7454e8a2a666216ff0d6f7260922bb72296d:

"build Bitcoin Core"

# Guix Installation and Setup

This only needs to be done once per machine. If you have already completed the
installation and setup, please proceed to [perform a build](./README.md).

Otherwise, you may choose from one of the following options to install Guix:

1. Using the official **shell installer script** [⤓ skip to section][install-script]
   - Maintained by Guix developers
   - Easiest (automatically performs *most* setup)
   - Works on nearly all Linux distributions
   - Only installs latest release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
   - Note: The script needs to be run as root, so it should be inspected before it's run
2. Using the official **binary tarball** [⤓ skip to section][install-bin-tarball]
   - Maintained by Guix developers
   - Normal difficulty (full manual setup required)
   - Works on nearly all Linux distributions
   - Installs any release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
3. Using fanquake's **Docker image** [↗︎ external instructions][install-fanquake-docker]
   - Maintained by fanquake
   - Easy (automatically performs *some* setup)

>    - Works on most Linux distributions

Reviewer 3: Commit bf244f908ec92d223fc8272cda66a4dc13545d8c

Works on Mac and (I think) Windows too.

[section](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Requirements.html) for more
details.

Build Guix (this will take a while):
```
make -j$(nproc)
```

Install Guix:

```
sudo make install
```

### Post-"build from source" Setup

#### Creating and starting a `guix-daemon-original` service with a fixed `argv[0]`

At this point, guix will be installed to `${bindir}`, which is likely
`/usr/local/bin` if you did not override directory variables at
`./configure`-time. More information on standard Automake directory variables
can be found
[here](https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/html_node/Standard-Directory-Variables.html).

However, the Guix init scripts and service configurations for Upstart, systemd,
SysV, and OpenRC are installed to launch
`${localstatedir}/guix/profiles/per-user/root/current-guix/bin/guix-daemon`,
which does not yet exist, and will only exist after `root` performs their first
`guix pull`. TODO: Link to `guix pull` as root section

We need to create a `-original` version of these init scripts that's pointed to
the binaries we just built and `make install`'ed in `${bindir}` (normally,
`/usr/local/bin`).

Example for `systemd`, run as `root`:

```sh

> # Create guix-daemon-original.service by modifying guix-daemon.service

Author: Fixed in 5e23466e04e8c46aba39a1e3bf297d1947455740

[ -L $GUIX_PROFILE ] || return
GUIX_LOCPATH="$GUIX_PROFILE/lib/locale"
export GUIX_PROFILE GUIX_LOCPATH

[ -f "$GUIX_PROFILE/etc/profile" ] && . "$GUIX_PROFILE/etc/profile"

# set XDG_DATA_DIRS to include Guix installations
export XDG_DATA_DIRS="$GUIX_PROFILE/share:${XDG_DATA_DIRS:-/usr/local/share/:/usr/share/}"
```

Please note that this will not take effect until the next shell or desktop
session (log out and log back in).

### `guix pull` as root

Before you do this, you need to read the section on [choosing your security
model][security-model] and adjust `guix` and `guix-daemon` flags according to
your choice, as invoking `guix pull` may pull substitutes from substitute
servers (which you may not want).

As mentioned in a previous section, Guix expects
`${localstatedir}/guix/profiles/per-user/root/current-guix` to be populated with
`root`'s Guix profile, `guix pull`-ed and built by some former version of Guix.
However, this is not the case when we build from source. Therefore, we need to
perform a `guix pull` as `root`:

```sh
sudo --login guix pull --branch=version-<latest-release-version>
# or
sudo --login guix pull --commit=<particular-commit>
```

> `guix pull` is quite a long process (especially if you're using

Author: :crossed_fingers:

[2021/03/30
permalink](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php?title=Guix&oldid=637559#AUR_Package_Installation))
to install Guix.

At the time of writing (2021/03/30), the `check` phase will fail if the path to
guix's build directory is longer than 36 characters due to an anachronistic
character limit on the shebang line. Since the `check` phase happens after the
`build` phase, which may take quite a long time, it is recommended that users
either:

1. Skip the `check` phase
    - For `makepkg`: `makepkg --nocheck ...`
    - For `yay`: `yay --mflags="--nocheck" ...`
    - For `paru`: `paru --nocheck ...`
2. Or, check their build directory's length beforehand
    - For those building with `makepkg`: `pwd | wc -c`

## Option 5: Building from source

Building Guix from source is a rather involved process but a rewarding one for
those looking to minimize trust and maximize customizability (e.g. building a
particular commit of Guix). Previous experience with using autotools-style build
systems to build packages from source will be helpful. *hic sunt dracones.*

I strongly urge you to at least skim through the entire section once before you

> start issuing commands, as it will save you a lot of unncessary pain and

Reviewer 4: typo: unncessary ==> unnecessary

anguish.

### Installing common build tools

There are a few basic build tools that are required for most things we'll build,
so let's install them now:

Text transformation/i18n:
- `autopoint` (sometimes packaged in `gettext`)
- `help2man`
- `po4a`
- `texinfo`

Build system tools:
- `g++` w/ C++11 support
- `libtool`
- `autoconf`
- `automake`
- `pkg-config` (sometimes packaged as `pkgconf`)
- `make`
- `cmake`

Miscellaneous:
- `git`
- `gnupg`
- `python3`

### Building and Installing Guix's dependencies

In order to build Guix itself from source, we need to first make sure that the
necessary dependencies are installed and discoverable. The most up-to-date list
of Guix's dependencies is kept in the ["Requirements"
section](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Requirements.html) of the Guix
Reference Manual.

Depending on your distribution, most or all of these dependencies may already be
packaged and installable without manually building and installing.

For reference, the graphic below outlines Guix v1.3.0's dependency graph:

> ![boostrap map](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6399679/125064185-a9a59880-e0b0-11eb-82c1-9b8e5dc9950d.png)

Reviewer 4: typo: boostrap ==> bootstrap

1. Using the official **shell installer script** [⤓ skip to section][install-script]
   - Maintained by Guix developers
   - Easiest (automatically performs *most* setup)
   - Works on nearly all Linux distributions
   - Only installs latest release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
   - Note: The script needs to be run as root, so it should be inspected before it's run
2. Using the official **binary tarball** [⤓ skip to section][install-bin-tarball]
   - Maintained by Guix developers
   - Normal difficulty (full manual setup required)
   - Works on nearly all Linux distributions
   - Installs any release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
3. Using fanquake's **Docker image** [↗︎ external instructions][install-fanquake-docker]
   - Maintained by fanquake
   - Easy (automatically performs *some* setup)
   - Works on most Linux distributions
   - Installs any release
   - Binary installation only, requires high level of trust
4. Using a **distribution-maintained package** [⤓ skip to section][install-distro-pkg]
   - Maintained by distribution's Guix package maintainer
   - Normal difficulty (manual setup required)

>    - Works only on distributions with Guix packaged, at time of writing:

Author: Right, fixed!

     - Debian Bullseye or later
     - Ubuntu Hirsute or later
     - Arch Linux (via AUR)
   - Installs a release decided on by package maintainer
   - Source or binary installation depending on the distribution
5. Building **from source** [⤓ skip to section][install-source]
   - Maintained by you
   - Hard, but rewarding
   - Can be made to work on most Linux distributions
   - Installs any commit (more granular)
   - Source installation, requires lower level of trust

## Options 1 and 2: Using the official shell installer script or binary tarball

> The installation instructions for both the offical shell installer script and

Author: 😰 Fixed!

so you should log out and log back in.

## Option 3: Using fanquake's Docker image

Please refer to fanquake's instructions
[here](https://github.com/fanquake/core-review/tree/master/guix).

Note that the `Dockerfile` is largely equivalent to running through the binary
tarball installation steps.

## Option 4: Using a distribution-maintained package

Note that this section is based on the distro packaging situation at the time of
writing (July 2021). Guix is expected to be more widely packaged over time. For
an up-to-date view on Guix's package status/version across distros, please see:
https://repology.org/project/guix/versions

### Debian 11 (Bullseye)/Ubuntu 21.04 (Hirsute Hippo)

Guix v1.2.0 is available as a distribution package starting in [Debian
11](https://packages.debian.org/bullseye/guix) and [Ubuntu
21.04](https://packages.ubuntu.com/hirsute/guix).

Note that if you intend on using Guix without using any substitutes (more
details [here][security-model]), v1.2.0 has a known problems when building
GnuTLS from source. Solutions and workarounds are documented
[here](#gnutls-test-suite-fail-status-request-revoked).

To install:
```sh
sudo apt install guix
```

> For up-to-date information on Debian and Ubuntu's release history:

Author: Going to leave it there since it doesn't hurt and in case people don't know how Debian/Ubuntu versioning works ("I have bionic, but is that after hirsute or before?")
